(lively melody)
(typing sound)
Alright, so in the last video
we did a dimple hashtable implementation,
but our implementation doesn't handle collisions,
and obviously that means
it's not all that useful of a hashtable.
So we're gonna take a look at two common stategies
for handling collisions.
The first one is called open addressing.
So with open addressing what we do
is if we try to put an employee into the table
and we find out that there's already an employee
at the slot where we wanna put the new employee,
then we look for another position in the array.
If we go back to our main method here,
when we call put with Mary Smith,
we know that Smith hashes to five
and we know that Jane Jones is already at position five.
So what we would do is say, okay, position five is full,
so let's look for another position in the array.
That's called open addressing.
There are different ways that we can look
for other positions.
We're going to use what's called linear probing.
With linear probing, when we discover that a position
for a hash key value is already occupied,
we increment the hashed value by one,
and then we check the resulting index.
So in our case, when we come to put in Mary Smith
we would discover that, oops, hashtable position five
is already occupied,
and so we're gonna increment five to six
and then we'll check hashtable six.
And if that's already occupied, we'll increment to seven,
and we'll keep doing that until we find an empty slot,
or we've check the entire hashtable.
If the hastable is full then we can't add the employee
into the hashtable.
So it's called linear probing,
because each time we increment the index
we're doing it in a linear fashion,
and every increment of the index is called a probe.
So if we have to increment the index once
before we find an empty position,
then we had to use one probe.
If we have to increment the index three times
before we find an empty position,
then we had to use three probes,
and obviously the lower the number of probes the better.
So let's update our simple hashtable implementation
to use linear probing.
So we'll go back to our class,
and the first thing I'm going to do is add a method
that checks whether a given position is alright occupied.
And so I'll do that down here
underneath our hash key function.
So I'll say private boolean occupied
and we want the accept an index,
'cause we're gonna be checking
whether a specific position is occupied,
and we're gonna return.
Hashtable index is not equal to null.
So if there's something already sitting
at that index then it's occupied.
So if it's not equal to null, we return true.
If it is equal to null, that means it's empty
and so we return false.
So now let's update our put method to use linear probing.
So we're still gonna hash our key
and then once we get the resulting hashed value,
we're gonna check whether that position
in the array is already occupied.
So we'll say if occupied hashedkey,
if it's already occupied, we need to do linear probing.
If it isn't, then we'll just come down here.
And it's still possible that we won't be able
to put the item into the array.
I'm going to change this to occupy though,
because the occupied method is essentially doing this now
so I'll say if occupied
hashedkey now this would happen if,
when we're doing our probing,
we've checked the entire array and so if the array is full,
it doesn't matter if we're going to do linear probing,
we're not going to find an empty spot.
So if when we come out of this,
if block to slot for hash key is occupied,
we're out of luck.
If it's not occupy, then we can go ahead
and add the employee at that position.
So let's do the linear probing.
The first thing we're going to do is set a stop index,
because we need to know when to stop looking.
So we need to know when we have looked at the entire array.
Now, this implementation is going to wrap
if we hit the end of the array.
So when we come in with Mary Smith,
we're going to hash her key value, we're going to get five
we're going to check whether five is occupied,
and we're going to get true.
So then we're going to do some linear probing,
so we'll increment the hash key to six
will check that position.
If that's full will go to seven
and we'll keep going, it's possible that all of the slots
up to the end of the array are full
and so if we hit the end of the array,
we want to loop back around to zero.
But then we need to know when to stop
because then we're going to be traversing the array
from zero upwards, and we don't want to traverse
right to the end of the array again,
because we've already checked some of those positions.
And so we're going to set a stop index
and that index will be equal to the hashedkey.
Because we've already checked that position,
we're going to increment by one
and if we keep going and loop around
and hit this position again,
it means we checked the entire array.
So we're going to say in stop index equals hashedkey.
And so we're going to loop around until
we find an empty spot, or we hit the stop index
and then we're going to say
if hashedkey equals
hashtable length minus one,
we want to set it to zero this is the wrapping.
So this is setting up the first probe and if the position
that we just checked is the last slot in the array,
we want to loop the next position
we're going to check his position zero,
and so we're going to set it to zero
if that's not the case, then we're just
gonna increment hash key.
And so all this code is doing here.
This code here is creating
the first value for the first probe.
And so in the case of Mary will come in,
we'll find out that position five is occupied.
Five is not equal to hash table that length minus one
and so we'll just increment five to six.
So six will be the first probe that we use
if we were coming in with a last name
that was nine letters long
and so we got the hash value nine.
If that slot was already occupied,
we don't want to increment hash key to 10
because then we're going to get an array
out of bounds exception in that case nine would equal
hashtable dot lens minus one and so we the first probe
value we want is zero.
You want to wrap back to the front of the array.
Alright, so now that we have our first pro value,
we want to loop that we want to say wall occupied hashedkey.
So while the slot we're looking at is occupy
and our hashedkey is not equal to that stop index
because if it is, we've looked at the entire array,
we just want to keep implementing hashedkey
and we're going to say hashedkey equals
hashedkey plus one mod, the length of our hashtable.
(typing)
Now, why this?
Well, we may want to rap to the front of the array
at some point, this code here just sets
the very first probe value.
So if we came in with a value of seven,
let's say, and seven was occupied, and so we increment
hashedkey to eight and then we're going to,
we're going to check position eight.
Well, let's say position eight is occupied,
so we come in, we're going to say eight plus one is nine
modded by 10 is nine,
so that's fine, we're going to loop around
and check position nine.
Let's say that's occupied so we'll come in and we'll say,
okay, nine plus one is 10.
We don't want to check position 10.
It's array out of bounds.
So we're going to say 10 mod 10 is zero.
And that wraps hashedkey back to the beginning of the array.
So this code here sets the first probe position.
And then on each loop iteration,
this will set the next probe position,
and it takes care of the rapping and that's it.
That's our updated put method and so if we come in
with Mary, and we discover that position five is occupied
will set, the value of the first probe will check
the position at the first probe
and if that's still occupied,
we set the value of the next probe, etc.
So when we drop out of this loop,
either we found an empty position
or we came out of it because we've looked
at every position and so if the position is occupied,
that means the array is full,
we can't add the employee,
otherwise we go ahead and add the employee.
If we come in and the first position
we check isn't occupied.
We're not going to do any linear probing
because this will return false,
will drop out here and we're going to do the check again.
It's redundant, but it's a constant time checks,
so it's not really all that big of a deal
and will, this will return false again.
And we'll just go ahead and assign the employee.
So let's go back to our main method
and let's run the main method.
I'm going to in comment, this print hash table.
So let's run.
And this time, we didn't get the Oops, sorry,
can't put Mary into the hash table
and as you can see, Mary has been put in to position seven,
John's at positions three, Jane's at five,
Mike's at six and Mary's at seven.
So our linear probing looked at position five
saw that it was occupied looked at position six
saw that it was occupied looked at position seven,
and bingo found an empty position.
And so that's working.
But now let's try to retrieve Mary,
so I'm going to copy this line and perhaps
you can guess what's going to happen here.
So instead of retrieving keys Wilson,
we're going to retrieve key Smith.
And let's go ahead and run.
And we have retrieve key Smith and oops,
we got Jane.
Now that happened, because we haven't updated
the get method.
So if we come back to the get method,
the get method is completely oblivious about linear probing.
So it's just still doing what it was doing before
going ahead and hashing the key
and then just returning whatever's there.
Now, if we're using linear probing in the put method,
we also have to use it and they get method
so rather than assuming that, oh, if we get a hash value
of five, that's where the key is, we actually have to look
and see was the employee at that position added with the key
that is being used to retrieve an employee.
But of course, we have a problem now because
we have an employee array.
The only thing that we're storing in our hashtable
is the employee.
We have no idea what keys the employees were added with
and so we're gonna have to store both the key and the value
in the array, it's not good enough anymore to just store
the value, and so I'm going to create a new class.
Called StoredEmployee.
And this class will have two fields,
it's going to have the key
and it's going to have the employee
and I'm going to make them public,
so that I don't have to create sets and gets
because that'll mean that the code and the hash table
won't be so cluttered.
So I'm going to say public string key.
This is the raw key This is not the hash value
because when we come to retrieve Mary
we have the key Smith and that hashes to five
and when we look at position five we need to know
if the employee there was added with the key Smith
we know they were added with a hash value of five
so that would be redundant information,
but we need to look at the employee
and say okay we see Jane Jones here
was she added with the key Smith and so we need the raw key,
and of course we need to store the employee
employee employee
and I'll have the ID generate a constructor for me
okay and that's all we need in our StoredEmployee class.
So now that we have that will have to come back
and update our our hash table class we need an array
of StoredEmployee stored employee
and so we'll have to update our constructor
to create an array of stored employee
and down here rather than just putting the employee
into the hash table we need to create an instance
of StoredEmployee,
so we'll say new StoredEmployee
and we want the key in the employee.
So nothing else needs to change here.
We're just changing what we stored,
but now we need to update our get method,
we can no longer just blindly return the employee
at the hash index, we have to check to see whether
we have the right key and if we don't,
then we have to use linear probing to keep looking.
And so I'm going to add a findkey method
and we'll use that to find the employee
that we're looking for with the given key
so I'm going to say private in findkey
and will accept the raw key as a parameter
and so the first thing we're going to do is hash it
because the first location we're going to look
at is the hashed value.
So int hashedkey equals hashkey key
and now we want to know if the employee that stored
at hashedkey index was added
with the key we're interested in, so we're going to say
if hash table
hashedkey is not equal to null
and hastable
hashedkey dot key dot equals the key we're interested in,
then we have found our employees,
so we can just return hashedkey.
And so this is saying,
if the key that was used to store the employee ID hash key
is equal to the key that we're using to retrieve
the employee, then we can just go ahead and return
the hash value because that means that the employee
at hashtable hashedkey was stored using the key
that we're looking for.
And so if we were looking to retrieve Jane Jones,
we call get with the key Jones
and Jones would hash to five
and then we'd look at hash table five
and we look at the key value the key value
in the in store employee instance in its Jones
that's the key for the employee we want to retrieve
and so we can just return hash key,
we found the employee.
Now, if that's not the case, we have to use linear probing.
And we have to do it the same way
we did it in the get method,
I mean you can't add one to every index in the get method
and then when it comes to finding an employee,
you're going to add five for every probe that wouldn't work.
So we're going to have to do it the same way.
And so I'm going to copy the code from here,
we're going to modify it, but it'll give us a head start.
So we don't, we don't care now, whether the position
is occupied, we care whether the key
that was used to store the employee at that position
matches the one that we're interested in.
So I'm going to take this line away.
So the stop index will be set the same way
and the first probe will be set the same way.
And actually, I'll reformat the code now,
so it's easier for us to see what's being done
so I'll come up to code,
reformat code, okay, and that pulls everything in.
So we've set our first probe
and now we want to keep looping,
as follows, so while the hashedkey is not equal
to stop index, because if it is,
and we examine every position in the array
and hash table
hashedkey is not equal to null
if it's equal to null we obviously don't want to look at it,
it obviously won't contain the employee
that we're looking for and the key at hashtable hashedkey
is also not the one we're looking for.
So not hash table hashedkey dot key dot equals,
the key in that case, we want to keep looking,
so we haven't looked at the entire array
and the position we're looking at is not the employee
that was added with with the key that we're interested in.
And so we're going to go to the next probe
and loop back around and keep looking.
And so when we drop out of this while loop,
there's two possibilities.
Either we've looked at the entire array or we have found
the employee.
So we're going to say if stop index equals the hashedkey,
then we've looked at the entire array,
so we're going to return minus one.
Otherwise, we're going to return hashedkey
and I forgot my semi colon up here.
Okay, so we use the same technique of linear probing
to look for the employee that was added to the table
with this key.
If we find the employee we we return
when we drop out of this loop.
Will be at the position where that employee was stored.
OK, so now that we have the findkey method,
let's go back to our get method
and this isn't going to be too bad
will say int hashedkey and this time we'll say find`key,
and then we're going to check for the minus one.
If hash key equals minus one,
we're just going to return null,
because that means there's no employee with the key
that we're looking for.
Otherwise, we're going to return the employee
and since we're storing stored employee instances
in the hash table, now we need to add dot employee here
and that's it.
That's our updated get method, so let's go ahead and run.
And this time we retrieved Mary Smith,
but we have to update our print method
because now we have stored employees
and we don't have employee instances,
so let's go do that now.
And there's another thing that we have to do as well.
It's possible of course, that a hash table position
might be empty.
That didn't matter before because we were just printing
hash table I, but now we need to print
hash table I dot employee and so we need to check for nulls
so we'll say if hash table I equals null.
Then I'm just going to say system dot out dot print line
and I'll just say empty
and otherwise
we'll print out the employee
and I'll add a few more details here,
I'll say position
plus I.
plus a colon in a space plus the employee
we're interested in.
So let's run again.
And now we've got the employees again,
we can see john Doe is at positions three,
Jane's five, Mike's six Mary's at seven
and when we go to get married back this time we get Mary
instead of getting Jane.
And so that's how linear probing works.
If the position at the hashed value for the key
is already occupied you keep incremental the index
and rapping to the front if necessary,
until you find an empty spot.
And as you can see handling collisions, complicate things.
And it also affects performance.
If we have to use probing, if there is a collision,
then adding an item into the hash table is no longer
constant time.
The worst case is linear Oh of n,
because it's possible that we might have to search
the entire table before we hit the last empty spot
in the array.
But as I said, in practise, it's it can be difficult
to come up with a hashing function that's going to return
unique values and a lot of times
the amount of space you have in the data structure
that's back in the table might not be large enough
to hold all the items you want to add,
in which case, it doesn't matter
how good your hashing function is,
collisions will be unavoidable.
Now, we talked about the load factor that can obviously
also affect how many collisions you're going to have
and how well linear pro probing works because
if your array is almost full,
then you're going to have to be using a lot of probes
to find an empty spot.
But if you keep the load factor reasonable
and so you'll occasionally resize the array
to create more empty spots,
then that will cut down on the number on the average number
of probes that you have to use.